--- PAGE 1 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
Available online 7 June 2023
0010-4825/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers in Biology and Medicine
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed
Diffusion-based conditional ECG generation with structured state space
models
Juan Miguel Lopez Alcaraz, Nils Strodthoff∗
The University of Oldenburg, 26129 Oldenburg, Germany
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Cardiology
Electrocardiography
Signal processing
Synthetic data
Diffusion models
Time series
A B S T R A C T
Generating synthetic data is a promising solution for addressing privacy concerns that arise when distributing
sensitive health data. In recent years, diffusion models have become the new standard for generating various
types of data, while structured state space models have emerged as a powerful approach for capturing long-term
dependencies in time series. Our proposed solution, SSSD-ECG, combines these two technologies to generate
synthetic 12-lead electrocardiograms (ECGs) based on over 70 ECG statements. As reliable baselines are lacking,
we also propose conditional variants of two state-of-the-art unconditional generative models. We conducted a
thorough evaluation of the quality of the generated samples by assessing pre-trained classifiers on the generated
data and by measuring the performance of a classifier trained only on synthetic data. SSSD-ECG outperformed
its GAN-based competitors. Our approach was further validated through experiments that included conditional
class interpolation and a clinical Turing test, which demonstrated the high quality of SSSD-ECG samples across
a wide range of conditions.
1. Introduction
Without a doubt, the vast amount of data generated worldwide
has been a major catalyst for significant advancements in machine
learning across a variety of data types and applications. However, ac-
quiring and sharing data can present challenges, even among different
departments within the same organization, due to privacy concerns.
This is especially true in privacy-sensitive fields like healthcare. Con-
siderable efforts have been made to enhance the security and privacy
of healthcare data through the implementation of regulations such
as GDPR or HIPAA [ 1,2], compliance measures [ 3–5], as well as the
development of technical solutions such as blockchain technology or
federated learning [6,7]. However, even technical solutions like feder-
ated learning alone do not guarantee complete privacy protection, as
trained models can be reconstructed to reveal training samples through
model inversion attacks [ 8]. Therefore, a combination of different
privacy-enhancing techniques must be employed.
The ability to create digital replicas of raw data, known as digital
twins, is a viable solution that preserves the statistical properties of
the original data while removing personal patient information. Data
augmentation techniques, such as statistical methods, provide limited
privacy protection by disguising the original data. Therefore, the use of
generative machine learning models has become increasingly popular.
However, it is important to ensure that the recreated data is accurate,
otherwise it may be biased [9] and negatively impact downstream tasks
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: juan.lopez.alcaraz@uol.de (J.M.L. Alcaraz), nils.strodthoff@uol.de (N. Strodthoff).
and decision-making, including interpretability [ 10]. This highlights
the need for generative models that can produce high-quality samples
based on different patient characteristics, as well as the development of
objective benchmarking criteria to evaluate the quality of the generated
samples.
Recently, diffusion models have exhibited remarkable outcomes for
data synthesis, surpassing other models such as generative adversarial
networks (GANs) or autoregressive models. These models have been
shown to have biases towards high-density classes [ 11], as well as low
fidelity dataset distributions [ 12,13], and are known to suffer from
training instabilities [14]. On top of that, diffusion models have shown
improvements on various downstream tasks [ 15], and have assisted in
the identification of new pathologies [ 16].
In this study, our focus is on generating synthetic electrocardiogram
data. The ECG is a commonly used medical procedure due to its non-
invasive nature, simple and reliable technology, and high diagnostic
value. It is an essential tool for the initial assessment of a patient’s
overall cardiac state. This importance is further highlighted by recent
advances in AI-based ECG analysis, as discussed in [ 17]. However,
many high-impact studies on ECG analysis have been conducted us-
ing private datasets, which poses a significant problem in terms of
reproducibility and hinders progress in the research community as a
whole. To enable the sharing of such datasets, high-quality digital twins
of private datasets, which contain highly sensitive patient data and
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.107115
Received 28 March 2023; Received in revised form 25 May 2023; Accepted 30 May 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
2
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
are subject to strict privacy requirements, need to be generated. We
demonstrate this process by creating and evaluating synthetic copies of
the publicly accessible PTB-XL dataset [18–20], which is a popular ECG
dataset.
The main contributions of this work are the following: (1) We
propose a diffusion model for generating short (10 s) 12-lead ECGs. This
model uses a structured state space model as its internal component. (2)
We introduce conditional variants of two state-of-the-art unconditional
generative models for ECG data. (3) We generate synthetic versions of
PTB-XL, a large publicly available ECG dataset, and evaluate the quality
of the generated samples by training and testing classifiers on these
datasets. (4) We demonstrate that our model has internalized domain
knowledge in several ways: (a) by comparing generated samples using
a beat-level aggregation across subgroups of samples with common
pathologies, (b) by meaningfully interpolating between different sets
of conditions, and (c) by conducting an expert assessment in the form
of a clinical Turing test that confirms the high quality of the generated
samples.
2. Materials & methods
2.1. Dataset and downstream task
The focus of this study is on short 12-lead ECGs that last 10 s.
These ECGs are obtained from six limb leads and six precordial leads,
which is the most commonly used method in clinical practice. The ECGs
were sampled at a rate of 100 Hz, as previous research has shown that
increasing the sampling rate to 500 Hz does not significantly improve
the ability to classify ECGs [21].
PTB-XL dataset
Our experiments are based on the PTB-XL dataset [18–20], which is
a publicly available collection of clinical 12-lead ECG data comprising
21,837 records from 18,885 patients. In order to train a high-quality
generative model, it is important to have a dataset of sufficient size.
For class-conditional generative models, which require sample-wise
annotations for all samples in the dataset similar to supervised discrim-
inative training, PTB-XL is a good choice as it provides annotations
for each sample in terms of 71 ECG statements in a multi-label set-
ting. These cover 44 diagnostic (organized into 24 sub-classes and 5
superclasses comprising normal, conduction disturbance, myocardial
infarction, hypertrophy, ST/T changes), 19 form-related (5 of which
also counted as diagnostic statements), such as abnormal QRS-complex,
and 12 rhythm-related statements, such as atrial fibrillation. It is worth
noting that this dataset represents a significant advancement in terms
of complexity, as it includes a broad set of 71 ECG statements, which
can be used in a multi-label setting. Most literature approaches have
typically focused on a single condition, such as healthy samples, or
on generating samples based on very limited sets of class labels. For
further information about the dataset, please refer to Appendix A and
the dataset descriptor [18].
Downstream task
As downstream task, we are examining the problem of predicting
ECG statements at the most granular level, which involves classifying
them into multiple labels. This task is a well-researched benchmark
on the PTB-XL dataset, and we follow the established methodology
outlined in previous work [22]. In particular, we make use of the
proposed stratified folds for model training, where the first 8 folds
are used for training, the 9th fold serves as validation set and the
10th fold as test set. Our evaluation metric for this task is the macro-
averaged area under the receiver operating curve (macro AUROC)
across all 71 labels on the PTB-XL test set. As model architecture, we
use a XResNet1d50 model, which is a one-dimensional adaptation of a
modern ResNet model [23], as proposed in [22]. We closely follow the
training and evaluation methodology outlined in [22], with a binary
crossentropy loss as our training objective, which is appropriate for a
multi-label classification problem. We train the model on random crops
of 2.5 s in length and during test time, we average seven overlapping
predictions from the same sample to obtain the final prediction for
the sample. To prevent overfitting, irrespective of whether we train on
real or synthetic data, we always perform model selection based on
a corresponding real/synthetic validation set score (macro AUC). For
further information on the downstream classifier and training, please
refer to Appendix B.
2.2. Background
Diffusion models
Diffusion models [24], which are a type of generative model,
have shown state-of-the-art performance on a variety of data modal-
ities, including audio data [25,26], image data [12,27–29], and video
data [30]. Diffusion models consist of two processes: the forward
process and the backward process. During the forward process, noise is
incrementally introduced in a Markovian manner. In contrast, during
the backward process, the model gradually removes the noise. The
forward process is parameterized as
𝑞(𝑥1,… ,𝑥𝑇|𝑥0) =
𝑇∏
𝑡=1
𝑞(𝑥𝑡|𝑥𝑡−1) , (1)
where 𝑞(𝑥𝑡|𝑥𝑡−1) = (𝑥𝑡;
√
1 −𝛽𝑡𝑥𝑡−1,𝛽𝑡1), 𝛽𝑡 are (fixed or learnable)
forward-process variances, which adjust the noise level and 𝑇 is the
number of diffusion steps. Equivalently, 𝑥𝑡 can be expressed in closed
form as 𝑥𝑡 = √𝛼𝑡𝑥0+(1−𝛼𝑡)𝜖for 𝜖∼ (0,1), where 𝛼𝑡 = ∑𝑡
𝑖=1(1−𝛽𝑡). The
backward process is parameterized as in Eq. (2), where 𝑥𝑇 ∼ 0,1).
𝑝𝜃(𝑥0,… ,𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑇) =𝑝(𝑥𝑇)
𝑇∏
𝑡=1
𝑝𝜃(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡) (2)
Using a particular parameterization of 𝑝𝜃(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡), it was shown
in [27] that the reverse process can be trained using
𝐿= min𝜃E𝑥0∼,𝜖∼(0,1),𝑡∼(1,𝑇) (3)
‖𝜖− 𝜖𝜃(√𝛼𝑡𝑥0 + (1 −𝛼𝑡)𝜖,𝑡)‖2
2 ,
where 𝜖𝜃(𝑥𝑡,𝑡) is parameterized using a neural network and  denotes
the data distribution. This objective can be understood as a weighted
variational bound on the negative log-likelihood that reduces the sig-
nificance of terms at low 𝑡, i.e., at low noise levels. Class-conditional
diffusion models can be realized by conditioning the backward process
on desired set of labels 𝑐, i.e., using 𝜖𝜃 = 𝜖𝜃(𝑥𝑡,𝑡,𝑐 ).
Structured state space models
In essence, structured state space models (SSSMs) rely on a lin-
ear state space transition equation that links a one-dimensional input
sequence, denoted as 𝑢(𝑡), with a one-dimensional output sequence,
denoted as 𝑦(𝑡), by way of a hidden state 𝑥(𝑡) that is of 𝑁 dimensions,
𝑥′(𝑡) =𝐴𝑥(𝑡) +𝐵𝑢(𝑡) (4)
𝑦(𝑡) =𝐶𝑥(𝑡) +𝐷𝑢(𝑡) ,
where 𝐴,𝐵,𝐶,𝐷 are transition matrices. In [31], it is discussed that
the SSSM (Structured State Space Model) is a promising model for
capturing long-term dependencies in time series. This is achieved by
discretizing the input and output relations and representing them as a
convolution operation. This operation can be effectively computed on
modern GPUs using a custom kernel. The ability to capture long-term
dependencies is closely linked to the initialization of the hidden-to-
hidden transition matrix 𝐴, as discussed in [32]. By stacking multiple
SSSM blocks, each with appropriate normalization and point-wise fully-
connected layers, in a manner similar to a transformer layer, one can
create a Structured State Space Sequence Model (S4). The S4 model
has demonstrated outstanding performance on a variety of long-range-
interaction benchmarks and sequence classification tasks, including
12-lead ECG classification, as shown in the most recent work [21].

--- PAGE 3 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
3
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the SSSD-ECG model architecture.
Related work
Deep generative modeling for time series data is an emerging sub-
field in machine learning, driven mainly by the constant progress
in the development of generative models, particularly in the field of
imaging. While various algorithm architectures have been developed,
such as variational autoencoders [ 33] and stacked denoising autoen-
coders [34], generative adversarial networks (GANs) remain the domi-
nant technology in the field, especially with recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) [ 35–38], transformers [ 39], or differential equations [ 40] as
building blocks. Although some prior research has addressed condi-
tional time-series generation [33,36,38,40,41], most of it is still limited
to the unconditional setting [ 35,37,39,42,43].
During the final stage of the manuscript preparation, we became
aware of [ 43], whose authors also applied a diffusion model for syn-
thetic ECG generation, albeit using image representations rather than
the time series directly and for the restricted case of the unconditional
generation of single-channel ECGs. Interestingly, this approach was
unable to outperform a GAN-based baseline according to several quality
metrics. Also very recently, Chung et al. proposed a conditional genera-
tive model to generate synthetic ECGs from text reports [44]. Due to the
different task setup, their results are not directly comparable to ours but
represent an interesting direction for future research. Nevertheless, we
see it as an import next step to establish proper baselines for the more
controlled case of ECG generation based on structured labels first.
Apart from these very recent works, numerous literature approaches
have attempted to address the issue of creating synthetic ECG signals,
but these approaches are often subject to significant limitations. Firstly,
many of these models are only able to generate short time series
[37–39,42], which is why many of them restrict to the generation of
single beats. Secondly, they are frequently trained on small sets of data
from few patients [ 36] or with limited conditional labels [ 33,40,41].
Thirdly, many of these approaches require ECG beat segmentation
as a preprocessing step, rather than working directly on continuous
signals [33,38–40]. Moreover, many of these approaches suffer from
different evaluation issues, such as being limited to patient-specific
generation and classification [41] or lacking training data and software
for filtering/feature extraction for the general public [ 35] (see Fig. 1).
2.3. Conditional generative models for ECG data
SSSD-ECG
Returning to the discussion of probabilistic diffusion in Section 2.2,
the only remaining component that needs to be specified is the explicit
parameterization of the backward process, denoted by 𝜖𝜃 = 𝜖𝜃(𝑥𝑡,𝑡,𝑐 ).
In this regard, we have implemented an adaptation of the recently
proposed 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐷𝑆4 model [45],where SSSD stands for structured state
space diffusion. The model is built on the DiffWave architecture [ 26],
which was originally proposed for audio synthesis using dilated con-
volutions. However, in 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐷𝑆4, dilated convolutions are replaced
by two S4 layers (as described in Section 2.2 ) to handle long-term
dependencies better in time series. This has been shown to be effec-
tive for various time series imputation across different scenarios and
forecasting tasks in [ 45]. SSSD-ECG, which is proposed in this work,
builds on the 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐷𝑆4 model architecture but also deviates from it
in several important aspects. The most important difference is due to
the different conditional information that is provided for respective
applications and the omission of task specific masking strategies. While
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐷𝑆4 receives an imputation mask and the remaining input signal
as conditional information, SSSD-ECG is conditioned on the set of
annotated ECG statements, which is in our case encoded as a binary
vector of length 71. This vector is transformed into a continuous repre-
sentation by multiplying it with a learnable weight matrix, transformed
through a fully connected layer and is subsequently passed as condi-
tional information to different 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐷𝑆4 layers. Figure Fig. 1 shows a
schematic representation of theSSSD-ECG model architecture. For more
details about the model’s internals and hyperparameters, please refer to
Appendix C.
As a further task-specific modification, it is worth mentioning that
in a standard 12-lead ECG, only two out of the six limb leads are
independent. This means that any set of limb leads can be reconstructed
using any two given limb leads, based on the defining relationships III
= II-I, aVL = (I-III)/2, aVF = (II+III)/2, and -aVR = (I+II)/2. To ensure
that the ECGs we generate satisfy these relationships, we use generative
models to synthesize only 8 leads — the 6 precordial leads and 2 limb
leads (I and aVF in our case). We then reconstruct the remaining 4
leads by sampling from the two limb leads (I and aVF). This approach

--- PAGE 4 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
4
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
is similar to the one used by [35] and is also applied to all baseline
models described below.
We believe that using a publicly available ECG dataset for training
is a critical step towards measurable progress. This allows for improve-
ments in model architecture and training schedules to be disentangled
from improvements resulting solely from larger or more comprehensive
training datasets. In contrast to previous limitations, the SSSD-ECG
model generates long sequences of 1000 time steps (for a 10-second
ECG at 100 Hz), is trained on a large dataset of over 18,000 patients,
and is conditioned on a rich set of 71 ECG statements. Additionally, it
generates full samples without the need for prior segmentation or any
other preprocessing and builds on publicly available code [46].
Baselines: WaveGAN* and Pulse2Pulse
Our primary contribution is the SSSD-ECG model, but we also
present conditional versions of two existing generative models for
ECG data, namely WaveGAN and Pulse2Pulse [35]. These models use
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [47]. We make these models
class-conditional by incorporating batch normalization layers into their
architecture and converting them into conditional batch normalization
layers [48]. This involves making the layer’s internal shift and scaling
parameters dependent on the class. We follow a similar approach to
map the binary label vector into a continuous representation using a
learned weight matrix. Further details about the model configurations
and training hyperparameters are provided in Appendix D.
Regrettably, we were unsuccessful in training effective generative
models for our particular case using publicly available implemen-
tations, except for WaveGAN and Pulse2Pulse as mentioned earlier.
Our attempts included creating generative models for time series gen-
eration, such as TTS-GAN [39] and well-established methods like
TimeGAN [42], but these models were likely challenged by input
lengths of 1000 time steps. We were also unable to generate samples at
250 time steps. Additionally, we were not successful in training a class-
conditional model using the cVAE_ECG [33] approach, as described in
Appendix D.3.
2.4. Performance measures for generative models
In this section, our objective is to propose measures to quantify the
quality of the generated samples. We can achieve this by training classi-
fiers on either real or synthetic training sets and testing them on either
real or synthetic test sets. It is worth noting that we only need to train
a single classifier on real data, which we will refer to as the reference
classifier, which is kept fixed for all the remaining experiments. From
it, one can infer three different performance measures:
(1) The primary criterion for evaluating the quality of synthetic data
is its capacity to replace real data. This evaluation involves testing
a classifier that is trained on a synthetic training set with a
real test set. The ranking of various algorithms based on this
measure is widely regarded as the gold standard for assessing the
quality of synthetic data models, as mentioned in [49]. However,
it is also valuable to compare the absolute performance of the
synthetic classifier with that of the reference classifier trained
on real data.
(2) The second metric, which complements the first, aims to de-
termine the realism of the synthetic data by evaluating it using
a reference classifier. This involves using the reference model,
which was trained on real data, to assess the performance of
the synthetic test set. The expected decrease in predictive per-
formance, as compared to the evaluation using the real test set,
is due to the inherent difference between the distribution of
the real training data and that of the synthetic test data. This
decrease can serve as a second measure of the performance of
generative models.
(3) The third performance indicator takes a distinct approach by
evaluating the internal consistency. It assesses how well a clas-
sifier trained on synthetic training data generalizes to unseen
synthetic test data from the same distribution. To evaluate this,
a classifier is trained on a synthetic training set and tested on its
corresponding synthetic test set. However, this criterion does not
reference the real data directly or indirectly through a reference
classifier trained on real data, which is why it is considered less
informative than the first two criteria.
We would like to draw attention to recent research such as [49] that
focuses on evaluating the performance of generative models, specif-
ically in producing output that matches a predetermined standard.
However, during our attempts to replicate the findings, we encountered
problems with instability when training one-class embedding as a
necessary step in [49], which proved to significantly affect the results.
Therefore, we have chosen not to include those corresponding results
in our paper.
3. Experiments and results
We trained three generative models – SSSD-ECG, WaveGAN*, and
Pulse2Pulse – based on the eight PTB-XL training folds. Each model
was conditioned on the respective sample annotations in the dataset.
After training each model, we generated a synthetic copy of the PTB-
XL dataset as follows: For each sample in PTB-XL, we generated a
new synthetic sample by conditioning on the ECG annotation of that
sample. For each of the three generative models, this resulted in a
synthetic ECG dataset that matches PTB-XL in terms of size and label
distribution. In this way, we obtain synthetic training, validation and
test sets, whose label distributions match exactly the corresponding
PTB-XL sets. We used these synthetic datasets for both qualitative and
quantitative assessments of the quality of the generated samples.
3.1. Qualitative assessment
To conduct a qualitative assessment, we chose two commonly oc-
curring conditions, namely normal ECGs (NORM) and ECGs with left-
ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) In order to be able to compare across
samples, we perform beat-level segmentation across 250 generated
samples for each condition by identifying R-peaks and cropping from
300 ms before the R-peak until 500 ms after the R-peak. Now, we plot
the median across all beats along with the corresponding 0.25 and 0.75
quantiles visualized through a shaded band. This allows for a direct
visual comparison of the main characteristics of the generated samples,
both across different models and in comparison to the real samples from
PTB-XL.
Fig. 2 presents a qualitative evaluation of healthy (NORM) gener-
ated samples compared to real samples. The WaveGAN* model pro-
duces signals with a significant amount of interference and numerous
ECG features that differ from those found in real signals, such as larger
R-peaks and absent P- and T-waves in most leads due to signal infer-
ence. The Pulse2Pulse model produces more consistent results, with
less variability across quantiles. However, there are some mismatched
features compared to real samples, including the absence of an S-peak
in lead I, a larger S-peak in lead II, and an opposite (upward) T-wave
in lead V1. The SSSD-ECG model is the one that closely resembles real
samples, with a higher level of confidence as the quantile bands closely
approximate the median in all features. This model correctly replicates
the P- and T-waves in leads I and II, as well as the downward T-wave in
lead V1. In addition, the features in lead V2, such as the R- and S-peaks
and P- and T-waves, are balanced.
Fig. 3 shows a comparison of synthetic samples with left-ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH) generated by different proposed models to real
samples, based on a qualitative assessment. The WaveGAN* model has
a lot of signal interference, which makes it difficult to observe certain

--- PAGE 5 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
5
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
Fig. 2. From top to bottom four grids of leads I, II, V1, and V2 respectively, where
for each grid from top to bottom and left to right real, WaveGAN*, Pulse2Pulse, and
SSSD-ECG Median (black line) and 0.25–0.75 quantiles (blue shaded area) segmented
beats for healthy (NORM) samples.
features such as P- and T-waves, although the R-peak seems to be
correctly shaped. In contrast, the Pulse2Pulse model fails to accurately
generate the R-peak, which appears curved towards the top in all leads,
and also fails to generate many other features, such as a straight T-
wave in V5 and a downward T-wave in V6, with a high degree of
uncertainty. Finally, the SSSD-ECG plots are the most closely aligned
with the real samples, generating a correct R-peak with relatively short
P-waves and balanced T-waves for all beats, with consistent confidence
intervals across all leads.
In summary, this initial qualitative evaluation provides indications
of the superiority of the SSSD-ECG samples over its competitors and
is consistent with the characteristics of the corresponding real samples
from PTB-XL.
Fig. 3. From top to bottom four grids of leads I, AVL, V5, and V6 respectively, where
for each grid from top to bottom and left to right real, WaveGAN*, Pulse2Pulse, and
SSSD-ECG Median (black line) and 0.25–0.75 quantiles (blue shaded area) segmented
beats for left-ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) samples.
3.2. Quantitative assessment
In Table 1, we present a quantitative comparison of the three pro-
posed generative models based on the performance metrics introduced
in Section 2.4. The first metric shows that SSSD-ECG outperforms its
competitors with a score of 0.84, compared to only 0.60 for Pulse2Pulse
and 0.58 for WaveGAN*. One possible explanation for this result is that
Pulse2Pulse and WaveGAN* are both GAN-based approaches, which
tend to focus on selected nodes rather than covering the full distribu-
tion. The second metric also shows a similar pattern, with SSSD-ECG
clearly outperforming Pulse2Pulse (0.71) and WaveGAN* (0.64) with
a score of 0.94. According to the third metric, all three approaches
achieve scores of 0.98 or higher, indicating a high degree of internal

--- PAGE 6 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
6
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
Table 1
Classification performance of XResNet50 models trained/evaluated on different
combinations of real/synthetic data.
Model AUROC
WaveGAN* Test real Test synth.
Train real 0.9317 0.6489
Train synth. 0.5816 0.9793
Pulse2Pulse Test real Test synth.
Train real 0.9317 0.7082
Train synth. 0.5968 0.9950
SSSD-ECG Test real Test synth.
Train real 0.9317 0.9434
Train synth. 0.8402 0.9822
Fig. 4. SSSD-ECG interpolation between a healthy (NORM+SR) and an inferior my-
ocardial infarction (IMI+SR+ABQRS) signal in lead V1, where 5 signals of 100% and
0%, 75%, and 25%, 50% and 50%, 25% and 75%, and 0% and 100% of healthy and
inferior myocardial infarction, respectively.
consistency among the models. In summary, the results of our exper-
iment demonstrate a clear quantitative advantage of SSSD-ECG over
its GAN-based competitors. We will now reflect in more detail on the
quantitative performance of SSSD-ECG and its implications:
Remarkably, on one hand, SSSD-ECG even achieves a slighter better
score (0.94) assessed through the reference classifier compared to
evaluating the reference classifier on real samples. This is an encour-
aging prospect for auditing ECG analysis algorithms, as pre-screening
with synthetic data may be conducted before evaluating them on
high-quality private test data.
On the flip side, it is important to acknowledge that the SSSD-ECG
performance during training with synthetic data and testing with real
data is notably lower compared to the reference classifier trained on
actual data (0.84 vs. 0.93). It is important to reiterate the difficulty
of the generation task at hand. This work is the first attempt at con-
structing a generative model that is dependent on a diverse range of 71
ECG statements. Additionally, one must not underestimate the fact that
these 71 statements are employed in a multi-label environment, where
the number of unique label combinations (including co-occurring con-
ditions) is significantly higher, which is a reflection of the complex
reality of co-existing diseases and disease states. Some of the ECG state-
ments are already sparsely populated with less than 100 occurrences
throughout the entire dataset, and this is even more pronounced in
the case of co-occurring label combinations. We consider it to be a
challenging but worthwhile objective for the research community to
devise methods that will bridge the gap in the ‘‘train on synthetic,
test on real’’ situation, ultimately allowing synthetic data to be used
essentially interchangeably with real data.
Fig. 5. SSSD-ECG interpolation between a healthy (NORM+SR) and a complete left
bundle branch block signal (CLBBB+SR) in lead V1, where 5 signals of 100% and
0%, 75%, and 25%, 50% and 50%, 25% and 75%, and 0% and 100% of healthy and
complete left bundle branch block, respectively.
3.3. Conditional class interpolation
In order to show that the SSSD-ECG model has gained valuable
knowledge in the specific field of ECG analysis, we conducted various
class interpolation experiments. Unlike other models, our model is not
limited to using only binary vectors as conditional information. Instead,
we can use any real-valued vectors with values ranging from 0 to 1. By
using a convex combination of two binary annotation vectors A and B,
specified by 𝛼𝑎 + (1 −𝛼)𝑏 for 𝛼 ∈ [0,1], we can interpolate between
the two conditions. The parameter 𝛼 determines the weight given to
condition A. The sample’s initialization is kept constant throughout the
process. By varying 𝛼, we can smoothly transition between the two
conditions. To better illustrate this, we divided the generated samples
based on R-peaks and only presented median beats extracted from the
signal. This makes it easier to observe signal changes as we move
from one condition to another. This not only serves as an interesting
consistency check, but it also opens up possibilities for more complex
generative models that can incorporate non-binary disease states.
Inferior myocardial infarction
Fig. 4 shows the interpolation between a healthy normal sample
(NORM) and a signal from an inferior myocardial infarction (IMI) for
lead V1. The labels for the healthy samples are based on their occur-
rence in the training sample and represent NORM and sinus rhythm
(SR). The labels for the IMI disease include SR, IMI, and abnormal QRS
complex (ABQRS). It can be observed that the generated IMI signals
and their interpolations exhibit an early Q-wave formation, whereas
the normal signal has a shorter and downward shape.
Complete left bundle branch block
Fig. 5 displays an interpolation between a healthy signal and a
complete left bundle branch block (CLBBB) signal as observed in lead
V1. The labels assigned to the signals are based on the occurrence of
training samples for healthy signals, which are labeled as NORM and
SR, and for CLBBB signals, which are labeled as SR and CLBBB. In
an electrocardiogram (ECG), various main features are observed that
are more representative of the CLBBB disease. Firstly, as the disease
increases, the QRS complex widens, which is clearly visible in the 75%
and 100% CLBBB signals. Secondly, on all signals, the RSR feature that
is characteristic of CLBBB becomes larger as the disease progresses.
Lastly, an upward trend on the T-wave can also be observed as the
disease becomes more severe.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
7
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
Fig. 6. SSSD-ECG interpolation between a healthy (NORM+SR) and a left ventricular
hypertrophy signal (LVH+SR+VCLVH) in lead V5, where 5 signals of 100% and 0%,
75%, and 25%, 50% and 50%, 25% and 75%, and 0% and 100% of healthy and left
ventricular hypertrophy, respectively.
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Fig. 6 displays an interpolation between a healthy signal and a
signal with left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), as observed from lead
V5. The labels used for healthy samples are NORM, SR, and for LVH
samples, the labels used are SR, LVH and voltage criteria (QRS) for
left ventricular hypertrophy (VCLVH), based on training sample occur-
rence. An important ECG feature of LVH can be observed, which is the
enlargement of the R-peak in one of the left-side leads (V5). As the
disease progresses, the R-peak also increases in size, and there is also
a downward trend in the T-wave as the disease worsens.
In summary, these case interpolation studies, conducted across three
different domains and aligned with domain knowledge on the con-
sidered conditions, suggest that SSSD-ECG has gained a significant
understanding of how different label combinations relate to specific
signal features.
3.4. Expert evaluation
As final component of our evaluation of the sample quality, we
presented the generated samples to an expert clinical and interventional
cardiologist for qualitative assessment.
Generative diagnosis on normal samples
To perform this task, we provided the expert with four 10-second
12-lead ECGs, including one real ECG and one sample from each of the
generative models. These four complete ECG recordings offer a detailed
visual representation of the generated samples. The expert was then
asked to distinguish between real and synthetic signals.
Fig. 7 depicts a 10-second real NORM signal that was evaluated
by the medical expert. The diagnosis was a synthetic sample because
of changes in voltage in leads I, III, and AVF, and a slow first vector
(R-wave) progression in the precordial leads V1-V6. Fig. 8 shows a 10-
second WaveGAN* NORM signal that was also evaluated by a medical
expert, and the diagnosis was a synthetic sample due to the absence
of a sinus signal, unclear P-waves, high interference, no symmetry on
RR intervals, and changes in voltage on the same trace. Fig. 9 depicts
a 10-second Pulse2Pulse NORM signal that was also evaluated by a
medical expert, and the diagnosis was a synthetic sample because of the
variability in P-waves, no symmetry on RR intervals, high interference,
and morphological changes in the same trace within the same lead.
Lastly, Fig. 10 depicts a 10-second SSSD-ECG NORM signal that was
diagnosed as a real sample by the medical expert. The diagnosis was
due to the well-defined P-wave and RR interval, and although there
was a bit of tachycardia, the signal contained clear isodiphasic patterns,
particularly in the I and AVF leads.
Fig. 7. Real (PTB-XL) NORM sample.
Fig. 8. Synthetic WaveGAN* NORM sample.
Clinical turing test
In this section, we present the results of a Turing test conducted
with a medical professional previously mentioned. The task consisted
of presenting 22 pairs of 12-leads ECGs (a total of 44), where one
is synthetic (a total of 22) and the other is real (also a total of 22).
The cardiologist was asked to perform two tasks. The first task was
to decide if the sample was consistent with the provided set of ECG
statements, which was either used to select a corresponding normal
sample from PTB-XL or used to generate the synthetic sample. The
second task was to determine if any of the ECGs in the given pair
appeared synthetic. In Appendix E , we provide a detailed breakdown
of the various combinations involved, which correspond to the most
frequent label combinations in PTB-XL, along with specific results
for each pair. However, in this section, we will only report simple
descriptive statistics. The original samples will be made available as
part of the code repository [ 46].
In the first part of the assignment, which involved evaluating diag-
nosis samples, a total of 44 samples were assessed. Among these, the
cardiologist incorrectly diagnosed 19 (43.18%) and correctly diagnosed
25 (56.81%). Specifically, out of the 22 synthetic samples, 7 (31.81%)

--- PAGE 8 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
8
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
Fig. 9. Synthetic Pulse2Pulse NORM sample.
Fig. 10. Synthetic SSSD-ECG NORM sample.
were diagnosed incorrectly and 15 (68.18%) were diagnosed correctly.
Similarly, out of the 22 real samples, the cardiologist diagnosed 12
(54.54%) incorrectly and 10 (45.45%) correctly. The higher confirma-
tion rate of 68% for the synthetic samples, compared to 45% for the
real samples, indicates that the synthetic ECGs are very accurate and
match their designated labels very well.
In the second part of the assignment, which involved identifying
synthetic samples, a total of 44 samples were considered. Among these,
the cardiologist identified 10 as synthetic, which represents 22.72%,
and 34 as real, which represents 77.27%. Out of the 22 synthetic
samples, the cardiologist identified 5 as synthetic (22.72%) and 17 as
real (77.27%). Similarly, out of the 22 real samples, the cardiologist
identified 5 as synthetic (22.72%) and 17 as real (77.27%). The fact
that 5 samples were identified as synthetic in both cases confirms that
it is difficult for a medical expert to distinguish between real and
synthetic samples. It is worth emphasizing that this conclusion applies
to a diverse set of 22 different medical conditions, which underscores
the high quality of the synthetic samples generated.
Table A.2
PTB-XL dataset details.
Description Value
Train set size 17,441
Validation set size 2193
Test set size 2203
Sample length 1000
Sample feature 12
Labels 71
4. Conclusion
In our study, we proposed a novel approach called SSSD-ECG for
generating electrocardiogram (ECG) data using diffusion-based tech-
niques. We conditioned our model on a diverse set of 71 ECG state-
ments in a multi-label setting, which is a highly complex task. The
generated samples excelled in different context from qualitative over
quantitative evaluation to conditional label interpolation and a human
expert evaluation, clearly outperforming the two GAN-based competi-
tors also proposed in this work. However, we observed that the gen-
erated SSSD-ECG samples were not entirely capable of compensating
for real samples when training a classifier on them. We believe that
bridging this gap would be a significant achievement and a measurable
sign of progress in the field in the near future. To encourage further
research in this field, we are releasing the source code used in our
investigations [46], as well as the trained models and a synthetic copy
of the PTB-XL dataset generated by SSSD-ECG [50].
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to extend their gratitude to Erick Davila
Zaragoza for conducting a meticulous evaluation of the samples that
were generated. Mr. Zaragoza is a certified clinical and interventional
cardiologist accredited by the Mexican National Council of Cardiology
as a general practitioner from the University of Guadalajara (UDG), and
as a cardiologist from the National Autonomous University of Mexico
(UNAM).
Appendix A. PTB-XL dataset
Table A.2 provides detailed information on the PTB-XL dataset
[18–20], which is a collection of 21,837 clinical 12-lead electrocar-
diograms (ECGs) taken from 18,885 patients. Each ECG recording lasts
for 10 s, and all signals were collected at a sampling rate of 100 Hz,
i.e., corresponding 1000 time steps per sample. During the experiments,
a set of 71 possible labels was used in a multi-label setting to provide
conditional information.
Appendix B. XResNet1d50 details
Table B.3 presents the XResNet1d(50) architecture details proposed
in [22], along with the corresponding training hyperparameters. The
architecture comprises four blocks with 3, 4, 6, and 3 layers, respec-
tively, of one-dimensional convolutions with an expansion of four and
strides of 1. The training procedure employed the Adam optimizer with
a learning rate and weight decay of 1 × 10−3 for 100 epochs and a
batch size of 64. Unlike the generated ECG data, the classifier was
trained on cropped samples of 250 time steps each. During inference,
the mean output probabilities were computed across seven different
crops obtained by shifting the window through the signal using a stride
of 125 time steps. The mean of the output probabilities was then used
as the prediction for the entire sample.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
9
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
Table B.3
XResNet1d50 hyperparameters.
Hyperparameter Value
Block of layers 4
Layers in each block [3,4,6,3]
Expansion 4
Stride 1
Optimizer Adam
Learning rate 1 × 10−3
Weight decay 1 × 10−3
Batch size 64
Epochs 100
Table C.4
SSSD-ECG hyperparameters.
Hyperparameter Value
Residual layers 36
Residual channels 256
Skip channels 256
Diffusion embedding dim. 1 128
Diffusion embedding dim. 2 512
Diffusion embedding dim. 3 512
Schedule Linear
Diffusion steps 𝑇 200
𝐵0 0.0001
𝐵1 0.02
Optimizer Adam
Loss function MSE
Learning rate 2 × 10−4
Batch size 4
Appendix C. SSSD-ECG details
Table C.4 provides detailed information on the architecture of the
SSSD-ECG diffusion model, which consists of a network of 36 stacked
residual layers with 256 residual and skip channels. For a comprehen-
sive discussion of the model architecture, we refer the reader to [45].
The SSSD-ECG model uses a swish activation function over the second
and third levels and has a three-level diffusion embedding in 128,
256, and 256 dimensions. To compute the initial S4 diffusion, we con-
structed a convolutional layer after the diffusion embedding to double
the input’s residual channel dimension. We then employed a second S4
layer that increased the conditional information and its inclusion in the
input. The output was routed through a gated-tanh non-linearity, and
a convolutional layer was used to project residual channels back to the
channel dimensionality. Regarding the hyperparameters, we used 200
time steps on a linear schedule for diffusion setup, with a beta value
ranging from 0.0001 to 0.02. We employed Adam as an optimizer with
a learning rate of 2 ⋅ 10−4. To learn the temporal dependencies of series
in both directions for the S4 model, we used a single bidirectional S4
layer. Based on prior research [31], we used layer normalization and
an internal state dimensionality of 𝑁 = 64.
Appendix D. Baseline details
D.1. Wavegan* details
Table D.5 displays the architecture and training hyperparameters
utilized in the implementation of WaveGAN*. The generator takes in
a one-dimensional vector of 1000 data points sampled from a uniform
distribution and passes it through five deconvolution blocks to generate
an output signal consisting of 1000 time steps and 8 ECG leads. Each
deconvolution block is composed of four layers: an upsampling layer, a
padding layer, a 1D-convolution layer, and a ReLU activation function,
in that order. The discriminator and generator models have a size of
50 each. In the conditional setting, we incorporated a conditional batch
normalization at every convolution in the generator. This batch normal-
ization takes in a batch of labels to condition, which is passed through
an embedding layer with an embedding dimension size twice that of the
output channel dimensions, and then added to the convolution output.
Table D.5
WaveGAN* hyperparameters.
Hyperparameter Value
Generator model size 50
Generator deconvolutional blocks 5
Generator latent dimensions 1000
Discriminator model size 50
Discriminator convolutional blocks 6
Optimizer Adam
Loss function MSE
learning rate 0.0001
Training epochs 3000
Batch size 32
Table D.6
Pulse2Pulse hyperparameters.
Hyperparameter Value
Generator model size 50
Generator deconvolutional blocks 5
Discriminator model size 50
Discriminator convolutional blocks 6
Optimizer Adam
Loss function MSE
learning rate 0.0001
Training epochs 3000
Batch size 32
D.2. Pulse2Pulse details
Table D.6 presents the architecture and training hyperparameters
utilized in the Pulse2Pulse implementation. Pulse2Pulse is an architec-
ture that is akin to a U-Net, but differs in its use of one-dimensional
convolutional layers for generating electrocardiogram (ECG) signals.
The generator takes an input consisting of 1000 time steps and 8
channels sampled from a uniform distribution. This input undergoes
five downsampling blocks and five upsampling blocks, where the up-
sampling technique used is similar to that of WaveGAN*. The down-
sampling process involves a one-dimensional convolution and a Leaky
ReLU activation function. For the conditional setting, we added a con-
ditional batch normalization to every convolution in the generator. This
batch normalization takes in a batch of labels to condition the output,
which is then passed through a word embedding with an embedding
dimension size of twice the output channel dimensions. Finally, the
result of the word embedding is added to the convolution output.
D.3. Other baselines
In this final appendix, we would like to comment on several baseline
models that we have tested for our use case. Specifically, we were
unable to train functional generative models using TTS-GAN, TimeGAN,
and cVAE_ECG.
The authors presented a GAN model called TTS-GAN [39], as an
unconditional generative model for time series data. They conducted
various experiments to test the model, including one where they gen-
erated electrocardiogram (ECG) data. We implemented TTS-GAN with
varying depths of layers for the generator and discriminator, including
4, 6, 12, and 24 layers. Additionally, we used different latent dimen-
sions for the generator, such as 128, 256, and 1000. Since our sequence
length was 1000, we mainly used two settings. The first setting had a
patch size of 200 and an embedding dimension of 5, while the second
setting had values of 100 and 10, respectively. The training process
consisted of 200 epochs with a batch size of 4 and a learning rate of
0.0001 and 0.0003 for the generator and discriminator, respectively.
In a similar vein, TimeGAN [42] is a well-known GAN model used
for generating unconditional time series data. Its creators conducted
various experiments to test its efficacy, albeit mostly on short signal
lengths. We attempted to train the TimeGAN model using the au-
thors’ recommended default hyperparameters, including a 3-layer GRU

--- PAGE 10 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
10
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
Table E.7
Turing test diagnosis evaluation.
Set Labels A(P) B(P)
1 NORM, SR True False
2 NDT, SR False True
3 ABQRS, IMI, SR True False
4 NORM, SARRH True True
5 LAFB SR False True
6 NORM SBRAD True True
7 PACE True True
8 CLBBB, SR True False
9 LVH, SR, VCLVH False False
10 NORM True False
11 IRBBB, SR True False
12 ABQRS, NORM, SR True True
13 IRBBB, NORM, SR True False
14 NORM, STACH False True
15 IMI, SR False True
16 ISC_, LVH, SR True True
17 ABQRS, ASMI, SR True False
18 NST_, SR False True
19 NDT, NT_, SR True False
20 ABQRS, ASMI, IMI, SR False True
21 LVH, SR False False
22 AFIB, NST_ True False
Table E.8
Turing test synthetic evaluation.
Set Labels A(T) B(T) A(P) B(P)
1 NORM, SR False True False True
2 NDT, SR False True False False
3 ABQRS, IMI, SR True False False True
4 NORM, SARRH True False False False
5 LAFB SR False True True False
6 NORM SBRAD True False False True
7 PACE False True False True
8 CLBBB, SR False True False True
9 LVH, SR, VCLVH False True False True
10 NORM True False False False
11 IRBBB, SR True False False True
12 ABQRS, NORM, SR True False False False
13 IRBBB, NORM, SR False True False False
14 NORM, STACH False True False False
15 IMI, SR True False False False
16 ISC_, LVH, SR False True False False
17 ABQRS, ASMI, SR True False False False
18 NST_, SR True False False False
19 NDT, NT_, SR True False False False
20 ABQRS, ASMI, IMI, SR False True False True
21 LVH, SR False True False False
22 AFIB, NST_ True False False True
module with 24 hidden dimensions, a batch size of 4, and 2000 train-
ing iterations. However, we were unable to observe any meaningful
generated samples.
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are a popular framework for gen-
erative modeling. cVAE_ECG [33] is a conditional generative model
specifically designed for ECG data. However, it differs from our ap-
proach in that it requires beat segmentation as a preprocessing step,
rather than generating continuous signals. Additionally, the label set
space of their implemented dataset is relatively small. In our work,
we used a learning rate of 0.001, a batch size of 4, and various
convolutional filter dimensions, including 3, 5, 8, and 10, as well as
convolutional kernels at length dimensions of 10, 50, 100, 500, and
1000. We also experimented with latent spaces of 10, 20, 50, 100, and
1000, with a conditional dimensionality of 71 given the dataset labels.
However, despite these efforts, we were unable to produce reasonable
reconstructions using the given model architecture.
Appendix E. Clinical turing test: Detailed results breakdown
Table E.7 presents information about the initial phase of the Turing
test, which involved evaluating diagnostic predictions. The predictions
for sample A and sample B were represented by A(P) and B(P), respec-
tively. The objective was to determine whether the given set of labels
accurately matched the represented sample. True was used to denote
correct diagnoses, while false indicated incorrect diagnoses.
Table E.8 presents details regarding the synthetic evaluation that
was conducted as the second part of the Turing test. In the table, A(T),
B(T), A(P), and B(P) denote the true label for sample A or B, as well as
the predicted labels for sample A or B, respectively. The value ‘‘true’’
indicates a synthetic sample, while ‘‘false’’ indicates a real sample.
References
[1] M. Tzanou, Health data privacy under the GDPR: Big data challenges and regu-
latory responses, in: Routledge Research in the Law of Emerging Technologies,
Taylor & Francis, 2020.
[2] J. Sullivan, American Bar Association Health Law Section, HIPAA: A Practical
Guide To the Privacy and Security of Health Data, in: Hein’s ABA Archive
Microfiche Collection, Health Law Section, American Bar Association, 2004.
[3] A. Abbas, S.U. Khan, A review on the state-of-the-art privacy-preserving ap-
proaches in the e-health clouds, IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inf. 18 (2014)
1431–1441.
[4] J.L. Fernández-Alemán, I.C. Señor, P.Á.O. Lozoya, A. Toval, Security and privacy
in electronic health records: A systematic literature review, J. Biomed. Inform.
46 (3) (2013) 541–562.
[5] M.M. Farooqi, M.A. Shah, A. Wahid, A. Akhunzada, F. Khan, N. ul Amin, I. Ali,
Big data in healthcare: A survey, in: Applications of Intelligent Technologies in
Healthcare, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019, pp. 143–152.
[6] R. Kumar, W. Wang, J. Kumar, T. Yang, A. Khan, W. Ali, I. Ali, An integration
of blockchain and AI for secure data sharing and detection of CT images for the
hospitals, Comput. Med. Imaging Graph. 87 (2021) 101812.
[7] J. Xu, B.S. Glicksberg, C. Su, P. Walker, J. Bian, F. Wang, Federated learning
for healthcare informatics, J. Healthc. Inform. Res. 5 (1) (2020) 1–19.
[8] H. Yin, A. Mallya, A. Vahdat, J.M. Alvarez, J. Kautz, P. Molchanov, See
through gradients: Image batch recovery via gradinversion, in: Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021,
pp. 16337–16346.
[9] P. Madley-Dowd, R. Hughes, K. Tilling, J. Heron, The proportion of missing data
should not be used to guide decisions on multiple imputation, J. Clin. Epidemiol.
110 (2019) 63–73.
[10] T. Shadbahr, M. Roberts, J. Stanczuk, J. Gilbey, P. Teare, S. Dittmer, M. Thorpe,
R.V. Torne, E. Sala, P. Lio, M. Patel, A.-C. Collaboration, J.H.F. Rudd, T. Mirtti, A.
Rannikko, J.A.D. Aston, J. Tang, C.-B. Schönlieb, Classification of datasets with
imputed missing values: does imputation quality matter? 2022, arXiv preprint
2206.08478.
[11] A. Brock, J. Donahue, K. Simonyan, Large scale GAN training for high fidelity
natural image synthesis, 2018, arXiv preprint 1809.11096.
[12] P. Dhariwal, A. Nichol, Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis,
in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 34, 2021, pp.
8780–8794.
[13] R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, Generating long sequences with sparse
transformers, 2019, arXiv preprint 1904.1050ß.
[14] A.M. Delaney, E. Brophy, T.E. Ward, Synthesis of realistic ECG using generative
adversarial networks, 2019, arXiv preprint 1909.09150.
[15] M. Seibold, A. Hoch, M. Farshad, N. Navab, P. Fürnstahl, Conditional generative
data augmentation for clinical audio datasets, in: Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2022: 25th International Conference,
Singapore, September 18–22, 2022, Proceedings, Part VII, Springer, 2022, pp.
345–354.
[16] K. Falahkheirkhah, S. Tiwari, K. Yeh, S. Gupta, L. Herrera-Hernandez, M.R.
McCarthy, R.E. Jimenez, J.C. Cheville, R. Bhargava, Deepfake histologic images
for enhancing digital pathology, Laboratory Investigation 103 (1) (2023) 100006.
[17] E.J. Topol, What’s lurking in your electrocardiogram? Lancet 397 (10276) (2021)
785.
[18] P. Wagner, N. Strodthoff, R.-D. Bousseljot, D. Kreiseler, F.I. Lunze, W. Samek, T.
Schaeffter, PTB-XL, a large publicly available electrocardiography dataset, Sci.
Data 7 (1) (2020) 154.
[19] P. Wagner, N. Strodthoff, R.-D. Bousseljot, W. Samek, T. Schaeffter, PTB-XL, a
large publicly available electrocardiography dataset, 2020.
[20] A.L. Goldberger, L.A.N. Amaral, L. Glass, J.M. Hausdorff, P.C. Ivanov, R.G. Mark,
J.E. Mietus, G.B. Moody, C.-K. Peng, H.E. Stanley, PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit,
and PhysioNet, Circulation 101 (23) (2000) e215–e220.
[21] T. Mehari, N. Strodthoff, Advancing the state-of-the-art for ECG analysis through
structured state space models, 2022, arXiv:2211.07579, extended abstract.
[22] N. Strodthoff, P. Wagner, T. Schaeffter, W. Samek, Deep learning for ECG
analysis: Benchmarks and insights from PTB-XL, IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inf.
25 (5) (2021) 1519–1528.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023) 107115
11
J.M.L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff
[23] T. He, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Xie, M. Li, Bag of tricks for image clas-
sification with convolutional neural networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 558–567.
[24] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, S. Ganguli, Deep unsupervised
learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics, in: Proceedings of the 32nd
International Conference on Machine Learning, in: Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, Vol. 37, 2015, pp. 2256–2265.
[25] N. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Zen, R.J. Weiss, M. Norouzi, W. Chan, WaveGrad:
Estimating gradients for waveform generation, in: International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2020.
[26] Z. Kong, W. Ping, J. Huang, K. Zhao, B. Catanzaro, DiffWave: A versatile
diffusion model for audio synthesis, in: 9th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2021, 2021.
[27] J. Ho, A. Jain, P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, in: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 33, 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
[28] J. Ho, C. Saharia, W. Chan, D. Fleet, M. Norouzi, T. Salimans, Cascaded diffusion
models for high fidelity image generation, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 23 (2022)
47:1–47:33.
[29] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, B. Ommer, High-resolution
image synthesis with latent diffusion models, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp.
10684–10695.
[30] J. Ho, T. Salimans, A. Gritsenko, W. Chan, M. Norouzi, D.J. Fleet, Video diffusion
models, 2022, arXiv preprint 2204.03458.
[31] A. Gu, K. Goel, C. Ré, Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
state spaces, in: International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022,
arXiv:2111.00396.
[32] A. Gu, T. Dao, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, C. Ré, HiPPO: Recurrent memory with optimal
polynomial projections, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
Vol. 33, 2020, pp. 1474–1487.
[33] Y. Sang, M. Beetz, V. Grau, Generation of 12-lead electrocardiogram with
subject-specific, image-derived characteristics using a conditional variational au-
toencoder, in: 2022 IEEE 19th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging,
ISBI, 2022, pp. 1–5, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISBI52829.2022.9761431.
[34] M.A. Rahhal, Y. Bazi, H. AlHichri, N. Alajlan, F. Melgani, R. Yager, Deep learning
approach for active classification of electrocardiogram signals, Inform. Sci. 345
(2016) 340–354.
[35] V. Thambawita, J.L. Isaksen, S.A. Hicks, J. Ghouse, G. Ahlberg, A. Linneberg, N.
Grarup, C. Ellervik, M.S. Olesen, T. Hansen, C. Graff, N.-H. Holstein-Rathlou,
I. Strümke, H.L. Hammer, M.M. Maleckar, P. Halvorsen, M.A. Riegler, J.K.
Kanters, DeepFake electrocardiograms using generative adversarial networks are
the beginning of the end for privacy issues in medicine, Sci. Rep. 11 (1) (2021)
21896.
[36] F. Zhu, F. Ye, Y. Fu, Q. Liu, B. Shen, Electrocardiogram generation with a
bidirectional LSTM-CNN generative adversarial network, Sci. Rep. 9 (2019).
[37] A.M. Delaney, E. Brophy, T.E. Ward, Synthesis of realistic ECG using generative
adversarial networks, 2019, arXiv preprint 1909.09150.
[38] T. Golany, G. Lavee, S. Tejman Yarden, K. Radinsky, Improving ECG classification
using generative adversarial networks, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 34, (08) 2020, pp. 13280–13285, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1609/aaai.v34i08.7037.
[39] X. Li, V. Metsis, H. Wang, A.H.H. Ngu, TTS-gan: A transformer-based time-series
generative adversarial network, in: M. Michalowski, S.S.R. Abidi, S. Abidi (Eds.),
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2022, pp. 133–143.
[40] T. Golany, K. Radinsky, D. Freedman, SimGANs: Simulator-based generative
adversarial networks for ECG synthesis to improve deep ECG classification, in:
H.D. III, A. Singh (Eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
Machine Learning, in: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 119,
PMLR, 2020, pp. 3597–3606.
[41] T. Golany, K. Radinsky, PGANs: Personalized generative adversarial networks for
ECG synthesis to improve patient-specific deep ECG classification, in: Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 33, (01) 2019, pp.
557–564, http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.3301557.
[42] J. Yoon, D. Jarrett, M. van der Schaar, Time-series generative adversarial
networks, in: H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alché Buc, E. Fox,
R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 32,
Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[43] E. Adib, A. Fernandez, F. Afghah, J.J. Prevost, Synthetic ECG signal generation
using probabilistic diffusion models, 2023, arXiv:2303.02475.
[44] H. Chung, J. Kim, J.-m. Kwon, K.-H. Jeon, M.S. Lee, E. Choi, Text-to-ecg: 12-lead
electrocardiogram synthesis conditioned on clinical text reports, in: ICASSP 2023-
2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[45] J.L. Alcaraz, N. Strodthoff, Diffusion-based time series imputation and forecasting
with structured state space models, Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. (2022).
[46] J.M.L. Alcaraz, N. Strodthoff, SSSD-ECG public code repository, https:
//zenodo.org/account/settings/github/repository/AI4HealthUOL/SSSD-ECG,
(Accessed: 2022-12-31).
[47] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A.
Courville, Y. Bengio, Generative adversarial networks, Commun. ACM 63 (11)
(2020) 139–144.
[48] H. De Vries, F. Strub, J. Mary, H. Larochelle, O. Pietquin, A.C. Courville,
Modulating early visual processing by language, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
30 (2017).
[49] A. Alaa, B. Van Breugel, E.S. Saveliev, M. van der Schaar, How faithful is
your synthetic data? Sample-level metrics for evaluating and auditing generative
models, in: K. Chaudhuri, S. Jegelka, L. Song, C. Szepesvari, G. Niu, S. Sabato
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, in:
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162, PMLR, 2022, pp. 290–306.
[50] J.M.L. Alcaraz, N. Strodthoff, SSSD-ECG data repository, https://figshare.com/s/
43df16e4a50e4dd0a0c5, (Accessed: 2022-01-19).

